Python asyncio vs. BEAM concurrency

Python asyncio
--------------

asyncio uses cooperative scheduling.

An async function does not immediately execute when called. Calling it creates
a coroutine object:

    coroutine = foo()

The coroutine executes when it is awaited or scheduled.

    result = await foo()

await suspends the current coroutine when the operation needs to wait and gives
control back to the event loop. The event loop can then run other scheduled
tasks.

Important: await does not itself create an independently scheduled task.

    result = await foo()

means the current coroutine cannot proceed past that line until foo completes,
although other already-scheduled tasks can run.

To schedule work independently:

    task = asyncio.create_task(foo())

The current coroutine can then continue doing other work before eventually
awaiting the task:

    task = asyncio.create_task(foo())

    # current coroutine can continue here

    result = await task

asyncio tasks normally cooperate on a single event-loop OS thread. A task must
reach an appropriate await point for another task to get an opportunity to run.

Because of this, blocking the event-loop thread is dangerous:

    time.sleep(10)

blocks the OS thread and prevents other tasks on that event loop from running.

By contrast:

    await asyncio.sleep(10)

suspends only the current coroutine and allows the event loop to run other
ready tasks.

asyncio therefore provides concurrency for I/O-heavy workloads without
requiring an OS thread for every concurrent operation.

Event loop
----------

The event loop is asyncio's scheduler. It runs on an OS thread and manages
asyncio Tasks. When a coroutine reaches an await and must wait, the coroutine
is suspended and control returns to the event loop. The event loop can then
run another ready task. When the awaited operation becomes ready, the event
loop can schedule the suspended task to resume.

BEAM
----

The BEAM VM is an OS process.

Inside that OS process, BEAM normally runs multiple scheduler threads. These
are OS threads, commonly with roughly one normal scheduler per logical CPU
available to the VM.

Elixir/Erlang processes are NOT OS processes or OS threads. They are
lightweight processes implemented and managed by the BEAM VM.

When Elixir calls:

    spawn(fn -> work() end)

BEAM creates internal process state such as:

    - PID
    - heap/stack
    - mailbox
    - execution state
    - scheduling metadata

and makes the process runnable on a BEAM scheduler.

The OS does not create a new OS process or thread for each Elixir process.

This is why BEAM processes are lightweight: BEAM already owns memory and
resources provided to the VM by the OS and can cheaply subdivide and manage
those resources internally.

Conceptually:

    Operating system

        BEAM OS process

            scheduler OS thread 1
                BEAM process A
                BEAM process B
                BEAM process C

            scheduler OS thread 2
                BEAM process D
                BEAM process E

            scheduler OS thread 3
                ...

BEAM processes are scheduled preemptively by the VM using reductions. An
ordinary BEAM process does not need to explicitly yield with something like
Python's await in order for another BEAM process to eventually be scheduled.

Because BEAM has multiple scheduler OS threads, BEAM processes can also execute
in parallel on multiple CPU cores.


Process vs. thread
------------------

An OS process is primarily a resource and isolation container. It has its own
virtual address space and OS-managed resources.

A thread is a unit of execution inside an OS process.

Threads in the same process share the process's memory and resources, while
each thread has its own execution state such as its stack and CPU register
state.

For BEAM:

    BEAM VM        = OS process
    BEAM scheduler = OS thread
    BEAM process   = lightweight VM-managed process


Key comparison
--------------

Python asyncio:

    Python OS process
        event-loop OS thread
            asyncio Task A
            asyncio Task B
            asyncio Task C

    Scheduling between asyncio tasks is cooperative.
    Tasks normally yield through await.
    Blocking the event-loop thread prevents other tasks there from running.


BEAM:

    BEAM OS process
        scheduler OS thread 1
            BEAM processes
        scheduler OS thread 2
            BEAM processes
        scheduler OS thread 3
            BEAM processes

    Scheduling between BEAM processes is preemptive at the VM level.
    BEAM processes do not need explicit await-style yield points.
    Multiple schedulers allow actual parallel execution across CPU cores.


Main takeaway
-------------

Both asyncio Tasks and BEAM processes are runtime-level concurrency
abstractions rather than OS processes.

The major difference is their scheduling model:

    asyncio Task  -> cooperatively scheduled by an event loop
    BEAM process  -> preemptively scheduled by BEAM

BEAM also normally has multiple scheduler OS threads, allowing BEAM processes
to execute in parallel across CPU cores.

Python asyncio is primarily designed to let many operations make progress
concurrently while they spend time waiting, especially for I/O. It requires
the programmer to avoid blocking the event loop and to use await correctly.

BEAM was designed around lightweight isolated processes, message passing,
preemptive VM scheduling, and large-scale concurrency.
